---
id: app-development-interactive-template
title: app-development-interactive-template
sidebar_label: Template
---
Render Template {#app-development-interactive-template}
===============

The `template/` directory contains the template used for constructing
the Interactive App\'s batch job. It is located in the root of the
application directory.

Assuming we already have a sandbox Interactive App deployed under:

    ${HOME}/ondemand/dev/my_app

The `template/` directory can be found at:

    ${HOME}/ondemand/dev/my_app/template/

When an Interactive App session is first \"Launched\" by the user, the
`template/` directory is:

1.  Copied to the user\'s home directory under an appropriately
    namespaced data root directory:

        ${HOME}/ondemand/data/sys/dashboard/batch_connect/dev/my_app/output/<session_id>/

    where the `session_id` is a unique id generated by the
    `dashboard`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} when a user first launches
    a session.

2.  All `*.erb` files in this new directory are rendered using [eRuby
    (Embedded Ruby)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ERuby) with access to
    the objects: `session` and `context`.

3.  All `*.erb` files are renamed with the `erb` extension stripped from
    the file name.

ERB Objects
-----------

In your ERB template files you will have access to not only the Ruby
standard library but also to the two useful objects: `session` and
`context`.

### Session

The `session` object describes the current Interactive App session. A
few of the helpful methods it provides are given below:

::: {.describe}
id (String)

the unique id generated by the `dashboard`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}
when the session was created

Example

:   Display session id

    ``` {.erb}
    Current session running is <%= session.id %>
    ```
:::

::: {.describe}
staged\_root (Pathname)

the directory where the session template is staged and initially run in

Example

:   Point to an image asset file that is staged by your template

    ``` {.erb}
    icon: <%= session.staged_root.join("assets", "icon.png") %>
    ```
:::

::: {.describe}
cluster\_id (String)

the cluster id used to submit this session to

Example

:   Determine if Owens cluster

    ``` {.erb}
    <% if session.cluster_id == "owens" %>
      ./run_owens_script.sh
    <% end %>
    ```
:::

### Context

The `context` object is an object that holds **all the attributes**
defined by the `app-development-interactive-form`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"}.

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

All attributes in the `context` object return a [Ruby
String](https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.3/String.html). So conversions are
necessary if you intend on operating on an attribute.

For example, if you want to perform arithmetic on the `bc_num_hours`
attribute that a user filled out in the Interactive App form:

``` {.erb}
export SECONDS=<%= context.bc_num_hours.to_i * 3600 %>
```

Note, that we used `#to_i` on the string to convert it to an integer
before performing arithmetic.
:::

Template Files
--------------

A running batch job for an interactive session will source and/or fork
aptly named scripts that it finds under the `template/` directory. These
scripts can be used to build the environment, launch the web server
process, and/or clean up the workspace when the process exits.

> skinparam defaultTextAlignment center :source
> \"\"template/before.sh\"\"; fork :source \"\"template/after.sh\"\";
> :generate connection information file; fork again :exec
> \"\"template/script.sh\"\"; end fork :source
> \"\"template/clean.sh\"\";

`app-development-interactive-template-diagram`{.interpreted-text
role="numref"} details the common workflow for a basic Interactive
App\'s batch script. The logic follows as:

1.  Source in the `template/before.sh` script if it exists.
2.  Fork off the `template/script.sh` into the background (**must block
    until session is done**).
3.  Source in the `template/after.sh` script if it exists.
4.  Generate the connection information file for the user.
5.  Wait for the `template/script.sh` process to complete.
6.  Source in the `template/clean.sh` script if it exists.

### Before Hook

*Optional*

The batch script will source the file `template/before.sh` as early as
possible if it exists. This file **must be** a Bash script. It can be
used for but not limited to:

-   populate the `port` and `password` environment variables needed for
    the web server and for connecting back to it
-   generate host-specific configuration files
-   generate secure password files

::: {.danger}
::: {.title}
Danger
:::

If you are creating a VNC Interactive Application, then **DO NOT** set
the `port` and `password` environment variables. There is already
internal logic in place that handles this for you.
:::

There exists some helpful Bash functions that can be used in this
sourced script:

::: {.describe}
find\_port \[MIN\_PORT\] \[MAX\_PORT\]

Finds an available port within the specified range
\[MIN\_PORT..MAX\_PORT\].

Default

:   \[2000..65535\]

Example

:   Find a random port that is available within the default range

    ``` {.sh}
    port=$(find_port)
    ```
:::

::: {.describe}
create\_passwd \[SIZE\]

Generates random alphanumeric password of length SIZE.

Default

:   32

Example

:   Generate a random password 16 characters long

    ``` {.sh}
    password=$(create_passwd 16)
    ```
:::

An example before hook `template/before.sh` that defines a port and
password file that can later be used in the script that launches the web
server may look like:

``` {.sh}
# Find available port to run web server on
export port=$(find_port)

# Define a password and password file used for authentication
password="$(create_passwd 12)"
export PASSWORD_FILE="${PWD}/passwd"

# Create password file used by web server
(umask 077 && echo "${password}" > "${PASSWORD_FILE}")
```

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

If your web server is supplied with a password file or a configuration
file that holds the password, be sure to set the permissions so only the
user has read access to the file.
:::

### Main Script

*Required*

The batch script will fork the executable `template/script.sh` into the
background. This file **MUST** exist in your template directory with
executable permission. This is where you launch the blocking web server
process.

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

The main script is forked into the background in the batch script and
then waited on. The batch script will exit when this background process
also exits. So be careful of web servers that are daemonized.
:::

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

If you are creating a VNC Interactive Application, then you **DO NOT**
need to start the VNC server process. There is already internal logic in
place that handles this for you.

You **WILL** need to launch the GUI application in the main script that
you intend to load within the VNC server.
:::

An example `template/script.sh` that launches a simple static HTTP web
server may look like:

``` {.sh}
#!/bin/bash -l

# Purge the module environment to avoid conflicts with user-specified
# initialization files
module purge

# Load the Python module
module load python

# Launch the simple HTTP web server
python -m SimpleHTTPServer "${port}"
```

::: {.danger}
::: {.title}
Danger
:::

The above example does not use authentication with a password as it is a
simple static HTTP web server. But it is highly recommended that
authentication be enabled for any web server you launch. Otherwise,
nothing stops a malicious system user from SSH tunneling to your live
web server and abusing the web server.
:::

### After Hook

*Optional*

The batch script will source the file `template/after.sh` right after
forking off the main script into the background but before the
connection information file is generated. This file **must be** a Bash
script. It can be used for but not limited to:

-   populate the `port` and `password` environment variables needed for
    the for connecting back to the web server
-   parsing any output files generated by web server

::: {.tip}
::: {.title}
Tip
:::

In some cases you are unable to get the port of the launched web server
until after the fact. This would be a good place to parse the web server
log and grab the port to set it.
:::

In most cases the `template/after.sh` will not be used.

### Cleanup Hook

*Optional*

The batch script will source the file `template/clean.sh` after the
background process for the main script exits. This file **must be** a
Bash script. It can be used for but not limited to:

-   cleaning up any temporary files that aren\'t needed
-   killing any misbehaving leftover processes

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

If the batch script hits the maximum requested wall time, then this will
not run. If this is an issue you are experiencing you may want to look
into setting the `timeout` option under the `batch_connect`
configuration feature in your `submit.yml.erb`.
:::

In most cases the `template/clean.sh` will not be used.
