---
id: release-notes-v1.4-release-notes
title: release-notes-v1.4-release-notes
sidebar_label: V1.4 Release-notes
---
v1.4 Release Notes
==================

Highlights in 1.4:

-   [Upgrade to Ruby 2.4, NodeJS 6, Passenger
    5](#upgrade-to-ruby-2.4-nodejs-6-passenger-5)
-   [Security Enhancement - PUN autogenerates secret key base if none is
    set](#security-enhancement---pun-autogenerates-secret-key-base-if-none-is-set)
-   [Security Enhancement: App development mode is disabled by
    default](#security-enhancement-app-development-mode-is-disabled-by-default)
-   [Security Enhancement: Enable whitelisting of directories in several
    core
    apps](#security-enhancement-enable-whitelisting-of-directories-in-several-core-apps)
-   [Security Enhancement: Require SSH for all hosts in Shell
    app](#security-enhancement-require-ssh-for-all-hosts-in-shell-app)
-   [Add ability to include Javascript in Batch Connect
    apps](#add-ability-to-include-javascript-in-batch-connect-apps)
-   [Better environment setting](#better-environment-setting)
-   [Customizable error pages for missing home
    dirs](#customizable-error-pages-for-missing-home-dirs)
-   [Experimental SGE/UGE support](#experimental-sgeuge-support)
-   [Fixed copy and paste issues in the Shell app for
    Firefox](#fixed-copy-and-paste-issues-in-the-shell-app-for-firefox)
-   [Improve default discoverability of apps in the Dashboard\'s
    navbar](#improve-default-discoverability-of-apps-in-the-dashboards-navbar)
-   [Optional Quota warnings on
    dashboard](#optional-quota-warnings-on-dashboard)
-   [Slurm 18 support](#slurm-18-support)

Upgrading from v1.3
-------------------

1.  Enable EPEL and update OnDemand release RPM

    CentOS/RHEL 6

    ``` {.sh}
    sudo yum install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-6.noarch.rpm
    sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/1.4/ondemand-release-web-1.4-1.el6.noarch.rpm
    ```

    CentOS/RHEL 7

    ``` {.sh}
    sudo yum install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-7.noarch.rpm
    sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/1.4/ondemand-release-web-1.4-1.el7.noarch.rpm
    ```

2.  Update OnDemand

    ``` {.sh}
    sudo yum clean all
    sudo yum update ondemand
    ```

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

The nginx RPM used by ondemand will upgrade the nginx RPMs provided by
EPEL, if they are installed.
:::

1.  Rebuild any custom Node.js or Ruby apps

    Since we upgraded to Ruby 2.4 from 2.2 and NodeJS 0.10 to NodeJS 6
    any custom Passenger apps in Ruby or NodeJS that have their
    dependencies installed in vendor/bundle or node\_modules will need
    to be reinstalled. Some code may have to be updated or dependency
    versions changed to work with the latest Ruby version.

    For NodeJS apps:

    For Ruby apps:

    If you need a way to continue to still use Ruby 2.2 or a different
    version of NodeJS [please post a question on our Discourse
    instance](https://discourse.osc.edu).

2.  Verify Navbar contains all the apps you want.

    The behavior changed from 1.3 to 1.4 so by default all categories of
    any sys app found appear as dropdown menus without the need for
    configuration changes.

    As a result menus may appear that you do not expect, if previously
    you were relying on the \"whitelist\" functionality of the
    `NavConfig.categories`.

    See `dashboard-navbar-config`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} for
    details.

3.  Verify Developer mode is configured how you want it

    See `enabling-development-mode`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} for an
    explanation of how developer mode has changed between 1.3 and 1.4
    and how to configure things properly. For sites that have active
    developers, this will either be adding configuration to revert to
    1.3\'s functionality, or creating some directories and symlinks to
    enable specific app developers.

4.  Optionally remove dependencies from prior versions of OOD

    ``` {.sh}
    sudo yum remove nodejs010\* rh-passenger40\* rh-ruby22\* nginx16\* git19\* v8314\*
    ```

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

As always please update the *development* or *test* instances of
OnDemand installed at your center first before you modify the
*production* instance. Remember, Ruby and Node have been upgraded, so
existing custom apps may need to be re-built.
:::

Infrastructure Version Changes
------------------------------

OnDemand\'s infrastructure components have been merged into a monolithic
repository. Component changelogs have been frozen and the parent
repository will now track all infrastructure changes: [OnDemand
1.4.9](https://github.com/OSC/ondemand/blob/v1.4.9/CHANGELOG.md). [Diff
with 1.3.7](https://github.com/OSC/ondemand/compare/v1.3.7...v1.4.9)

Application Version Changes
---------------------------

> -   -   App
>     -   Version
>
> -   -   [Dashboard App]{.title-ref}
>     -   1.26.2 →
>         [1.30.2](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/blob/v1.30.2/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/compare/v1.26.2...v1.30.2))
>
> -   -   [Shell App]{.title-ref}
>     -   1.3.1 →
>         [1.4.2](https://github.com/OSC/ood-shell/blob/v1.4.2/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-shell/compare/v1.3.1...v1.4.2))
>
> -   -   [Files App]{.title-ref}
>     -   1.4.1 →
>         [1.5.0](https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileexplorer/blob/v1.5.0/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileexplorer/compare/v1.4.1...v1.5.0))
>
> -   -   [File Editor App]{.title-ref}
>     -   1.3.3 →
>         [1.4.0](https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileeditor/blob/v1.4.0/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileeditor/compare/v1.3.3...v1.4.0))
>
> -   -   [Active Jobs App]{.title-ref}
>     -   1.6.2 →
>         [1.6.8](https://github.com/OSC/ood-activejobs/blob/v1.6.8/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-activejobs/compare/v1.6.2...v1.6.8))
>
> -   -   [Job Composer App]{.title-ref}
>     -   2.8.3 →
>         [2.10.1](https://github.com/OSC/ood-myjobs/blob/v2.10.1/CHANGELOG.md)
>         ([diff](https://github.com/OSC/ood-myjobs/compare/v2.8.3...v2.10.1))
>
> -   -   [Desktops App]{.title-ref}
>     -   Unchanged

`v1.4-app-versions`{.interpreted-text role="numref"} lists the versions
as well as the previous version it was updated from for each of the
system web applications in this release.

Details
-------

### Upgrade to Ruby 2.4, NodeJS 6, Passenger 5

This upgrade updates our dependencies to Software Collections Ruby 2.4
and NodeJS 6. Passenger is also seeing an upgrade to version 5, but
until Passenger 5 is supported by SCL OSC will host the Passenger 5 and
NGINX 1.14 RPMs which are built based on the [Passenger RPM automation
repo](https://github.com/phusion/passenger_rpm_automation). A side
effect of these dependency changes is that custom applications may need
to be rebuilt before they will work.

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

The Per User NGINX temporary directory has been moved from
`/var/lib/nginx` to `/var/tmp/nginx` due to an issue with more
restrictive permissions with NGINX 1.14.

A consequence of this NGINX 1.14 upgrade is that NGINX directories like
`/var/log/nginx` have become more restrictive - owned by the nginx user
and set by default to 700.
:::

### Security Enhancement - PUN autogenerates secret key base if none is set

The PUN will autogenerate its own unique per-user secret key base string
which is generated at first launch if it doesn\'t exist. This is used by
Rails apps to encrypt cookies and overrides the default one set in
[env.production](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/blob/a20cae91fb0f636c8a7e3fc8dfe508d9afa34d50/.env.production#L1).

### Security Enhancement: App development mode is disabled by default

Development mode disabled by default: application development gives
increased access to a system (e.g. allowing the user to open an
interactive shell on the web node), and should only be enabled for
trusted users. For details, see
`enabling-development-mode`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}.

### Security Enhancement: Enable whitelisting of directories in several core apps

The file editor, file browser and job composer now support an optional
whitelist of browseable/editable directories. Directories and files not
in the whitelist will never be forbidden to users. The whitelist is
controlled by the environment variable `WHITELIST_PATH`, which is best
be defined by editing `/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml` under the
`pun_custom_env` map.

### Security Enhancement: Require SSH for all hosts in Shell app

Prior to this release it was possible for OOD users to change the URL in
the shell application and connect directly to the web node by starting a
Bash shell on localhost. Given that this ability for arbitrary user
access is counter intuitive to how web servers are typically managed,
the exemption for localhost has been removed; users will always use SSH
to connect to any host, allowing SSH access controls to work.

### Add ability to include Javascript in Batch Connect apps

Batch Connect applications may now define a Javascript file to add
interactive frontend functionality. [Github
OSC/ood-dashboard\#426](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/pull/426).
The contents of this JavaScript file will be embedded in `<script>` tags
at the bottom of the form below the Launch button.

-   For apps like [the example
    Jupyter](https://github.com/OSC/bc_example_jupyter) app whose form
    is defined in the form.yml, you can add a `form.js` file alongside
    the `form.yml`.
-   For \"subapps\" like bc\_desktop where you have overrides defined in
    a `custom_name.yml` you can add a `custom_name.js` for that
    JavaScript file to be loaded by that app.

So for example, OSC has a Pitzer interactive desktop defined in [this
directory](https://github.com/OSC/osc-ood-config/tree/5440c0c2f3e3d337df1b0306c9e9d5b80f97a7e4/ondemand.osc.edu/apps/bc_desktop)
as `pitzer.yml` so we could add a `pitzer.js` file.

### Better environment setting

The file `/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml` now includes two methods to
set the PUN environment. Populating the mapping `pun_custom_env` allows
sites to define OOD specific environment variables that will be added to
the PUN environment. Defining the sequence `pun_custom_env_declarations`
confers the ability to define an arbitrary list of env vars to declare
in the PUN config (so they are retained from whatever is set in
/etc/ood/profile).

For example:
[nginx\_stage\_example.yml.](https://github.com/OSC/ondemand/blob/d85a3982d69746144d12bb808d2419b42ccc97a1/nginx_stage/share/nginx_stage_example.yml#L26-L43)

### Customizable error pages for missing home dirs

Customizable error pages for missing home directory during the first
login flow for sites using `pam_mkhomedir.so`. [OOD Discourse: launching
ondemand when home directory does not
exist](https://discourse.osc.edu/t/launching-ondemand-when-home-directory-does-not-exist/53).

### Experimental SGE/UGE support

A [job adapter has been
written](/installation/resource-manager/sge.html) that supports Sun Grid
Engine derivatives. The adapter is known to be compatible with SGE 6.2u5
and Univa GE 8.0.1. Thanks to UCLA for donating access to Hoffman2 to
aid in development of the adapter.

### Fixed copy and paste issues in the Shell app for Firefox

Resolved a pair of issues
([\#48](https://github.com/OSC/ood-shell/issues/48),
[\#55](https://github.com/OSC/ood-shell/issues/55)) that caused problems
with copy and paste in the Shell application.

### Improve default discoverability of apps in the Dashboard\'s navbar

Introduction of a whitelist mode for the Dashboard navbar which is
disabled by default. This change means that by default, when deploying a
new app, if properly configured it will appear in the Dashboard\'s
navigation menu without the need for changing configuration.
[OSC/ood-dashboard\#295](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/issues/295)

For details please see `dashboard-navbar-config`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"}.

### Optional Quota warnings on dashboard

The Dashboard can now display a configurable disk usage warning to the
user if they approach a certain usage threshold. This feature is enabled
by defining the environment variable `OOD_QUOTA_PATH` which can take a
colon delimited path, and may be defined in
`/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml` under the `custom_env` map. The
version 1 format for quota files is defined in the [Dashboard
README](https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/blob/v1.30.2/README.md#disk-quota-warnings).

### Slurm 18 Support

Slurm 18.x introduced [a
bug](https://bugs.schedmd.com/show_bug.cgi?id=6120) with the fields
[gres]{.title-ref} or [tres]{.title-ref} in [squeue]{.title-ref} output
which [broke prior
versions](https://github.com/OSC/ood-activejobs/issues/169) of the Slurm
adapter. The OOD team has both updated the OOD Slurm adapter to function
normally despite the bug, and submitted a fix which Slurm will be
releasing in a future version.
